
Transmission Control Protocol
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is one of the main protocols of the Internet protocol suite. It originated in the initial network implementation in which it complemented the Internet Protocol (IP). Therefore, the entire suite is commonly referred to as TCP/IP. TCP provides reliable, ordered, and error-checked delivery of a stream of octets (bytes) between applications running on hosts communicating via an IP network. Major internet applications such as the World Wide Web, email, remote administration, and file transfer rely on TCP, which is part of the Transport Layer of the TCP/IP suite. SSL/TLS often runs on top of TCP.

TCP is connection-oriented, and a connection between client and server is established before data can be sent. The server must be listening (passive open) for connection requests from clients before a connection is established. Three-way handshake (active open), retransmission, and error detection adds to reliability but lengthens latency. Applications that do not require reliable data stream service may use the User Datagram Protocol (UDP), which provides a connectionless datagram service that prioritizes time over reliability. TCP employs network congestion avoidance. However, there are vulnerabilities to TCP, including denial of service, connection hijacking, TCP veto, and reset attack.

Internet protocol suite
Application layer
BGPDHCP(v6)DNSFTPHTTPHTTPSIMAPLDAPMGCPMQTTNNTPNTPOSPFPOPPTPONC/RPCRTPRTSPRIPSIPSMTPSNMPSSHTelnetTLS/SSLXMPPmore...
Transport layer
TCPUDPDCCPSCTPRSVPQUICmore...
Internet layer
IP IPv4IPv6ICMP(v6)NDPECNIGMPIPsecmore...
Link layer
TunnelsPPPMAC
more...
vte

Contents
1	Historical origin
2	Network function
3	TCP segment structure
4	Protocol operation
4.1	Connection establishment
4.2	Connection termination
4.3	Resource usage
4.4	Data transfer
4.4.1	Reliable transmission
4.4.1.1	Dupack-based retransmission
4.4.1.2	Timeout-based retransmission
4.4.2	Error detection
4.4.3	Flow control
4.4.4	Congestion control
4.5	Maximum segment size
4.6	Selective acknowledgments
4.7	Window scaling
4.8	TCP timestamps
4.9	Out-of-band data
4.10	Forcing data delivery
5	Vulnerabilities
5.1	Denial of service
5.2	Connection hijacking
5.3	TCP veto
6	TCP ports
7	Development
7.1	Deprecated proposals
8	TCP over wireless networks
9	Hardware implementations
10	Debugging
11	Alternatives
12	Checksum computation
12.1	TCP checksum for IPv4
12.2	TCP checksum for IPv6
12.3	Checksum offload
13	RFC documents
14	See also
15	Notes
16	References
17	Further reading
18	External links
Historical origin
In May 1974, Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn described an internetworking protocol for sharing resources using packet switching among network nodes.[1] The authors had been working with Gérard Le Lann to incorporate concepts from the French CYCLADES project into the new network.[2] The specification of the resulting protocol, RFC 675 (Specification of Internet Transmission Control Program), was written by Vint Cerf, Yogen Dalal, and Carl Sunshine, and published in December 1974. It contains the first attested use of the term internet, as a shorthand for internetwork.[3]

A central control component of this model was the Transmission Control Program that incorporated both connection-oriented links and datagram services between hosts. The monolithic Transmission Control Program was later divided into a modular architecture consisting of the Transmission Control Protocol and the Internet Protocol. This resulted in a networking model that became known informally as TCP/IP, although formally it was variously referred to as the Department of Defense (DOD) model, and ARPANET model, and eventually also as the Internet Protocol Suite.

In 2004, Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn received the Turing Award for their foundational work on TCP/IP.[4][5]

Network function
The Transmission Control Protocol provides a communication service at an intermediate level between an application program and the Internet Protocol. It provides host-to-host connectivity at the transport layer of the Internet model. An application does not need to know the particular mechanisms for sending data via a link to another host, such as the required IP fragmentation to accommodate the maximum transmission unit of the transmission medium. At the transport layer, TCP handles all handshaking and transmission details and presents an abstraction of the network connection to the application typically through a network socket interface.

At the lower levels of the protocol stack, due to network congestion, traffic load balancing, or unpredictable network behaviour, IP packets may be lost, duplicated, or delivered out of order. TCP detects these problems, requests re-transmission of lost data, rearranges out-of-order data and even helps minimize network congestion to reduce the occurrence of the other problems. If the data still remains undelivered, the source is notified of this failure. Once the TCP receiver has reassembled the sequence of octets originally transmitted, it passes them to the receiving application. Thus, TCP abstracts the application's communication from the underlying networking details.

TCP is used extensively by many internet applications, including the World Wide Web (WWW), email, File Transfer Protocol, Secure Shell, peer-to-peer file sharing, and streaming media.

TCP is optimized for accurate delivery rather than timely delivery and can incur relatively long delays (on the order of seconds) while waiting for out-of-order messages or re-transmissions of lost messages. Therefore, it is not particularly suitable for real-time applications such as voice over IP. For such applications, protocols like the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) operating over the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) are usually recommended instead.[6]

TCP is a reliable stream delivery service which guarantees that all bytes received will be identical and in the same order as those sent. Since packet transfer by many networks is not reliable, TCP achieves this using a technique known as positive acknowledgement with re-transmission. This requires the receiver to respond with an acknowledgement message as it receives the data. The sender keeps a record of each packet it sends and maintains a timer from when the packet was sent. The sender re-transmits a packet if the timer expires before receiving the acknowledgement. The timer is needed in case a packet gets lost or corrupted.[6]

While IP handles actual delivery of the data, TCP keeps track of segments - the individual units of data transmission that a message is divided into for efficient routing through the network. For example, when an HTML file is sent from a web server, the TCP software layer of that server divides the file into segments and forwards them individually to the internet layer in the network stack. The internet layer software encapsulates each TCP segment into an IP packet by adding a header that includes (among other data) the destination IP address. When the client program on the destination computer receives them, the TCP software in the transport layer re-assembles the segments and ensures they are correctly ordered and error-free as it streams the file contents to the receiving application.

TCP segment structure
Transmission Control Protocol accepts data from a data stream, divides it into chunks, and adds a TCP header creating a TCP segment. The TCP segment is then encapsulated into an Internet Protocol (IP) datagram, and exchanged with peers.[7]

The term TCP packet appears in both informal and formal usage, whereas in more precise terminology segment refers to the TCP protocol data unit (PDU), datagram[8] to the IP PDU, and frame to the data link layer PDU:

Processes transmit data by calling on the TCP and passing buffers of data as arguments. The TCP packages the data from these buffers into segments and calls on the internet module [e.g. IP] to transmit each segment to the destination TCP.[9]

A TCP segment consists of a segment header and a data section. The segment header contains 10 mandatory fields, and an optional extension field (Options, pink background in table). The data section follows the header and is the payload data carried for the application. The length of the data section is not specified in the segment header; It can be calculated by subtracting the combined length of the segment header and IP header from the total IP datagram length specified in the IP header.

TCP segment header
Offsets	Octet	0	1	2	3
Octet	Bit	 7	 6	 5	 4	 3	 2	 1	 0	 7	 6	5	4	3	2	1	0	7	6	5	4	3	2	1	0	7	6	5	4	3	2	1	0
0	0	Source port	Destination port
4	32	Sequence number
8	64	Acknowledgment number (if ACK set)
12	96	Data offset	Reserved
0 0 0	
NS
CWR
ECE
URG
ACK
PSH
RST
SYN
FIN
Window Size
16	128	Checksum	Urgent pointer (if URG set)
20
160
Options (if data offset > 5. Padded at the end with "0" bits if necessary.)
